# Problem 5: FFI

There is one issue in Zeekscript that has to be handled well: you can call BiFs (built-in functions). Each one of these takes `Val*` objects in directly. We need them to work with `ZVal`.

## Maintaining old BiFs

There will be a number of BiFs that we will not switch their interface: it's just too much work (and too much deprecation, since users can write BiFs too) to force switching every BiF to the new values. Because of this, we need a shim.

The first point, BiFs will take in values exactly as they do now (ie mostly `Val*` for complex types). Then, we must expand bifcl. It will generate a shim, which instead takes in `ZVal`. Each `ZVal` then calls the converter to convert them into `Val*` (or whatever the argument type is). Then, it calls the BiF with its current signature, as-is today.

This adds an extra conversion from `ZVal` to `Val*`, so it should be used sparingly. But, this is a necessary step if we convert to using `ZVal` entirely.

## Optimization

Just like current ZAM, we should replace some high-frequency BiFs. It's the same mechanism as for like `network_time`, but we can simply move a bunch of the standard BiFs over to the Rust interpreter. This will become a "standard library" that the interpreter natively understands. Standard library calls could have optimizations to not require any data copying, or they could be special bytecode instructions. The specifics here aren't important, but for the number of BiFs that are frequently called, they should be reimplemented in the fastest way.

## Moving Forward

When we want to add new BiFs, we should implement these within the interpreter. These should never, ever (!) be within some `.bif`, `.op`, or anything similar, file. These are simply Rust or C++ or Zeek script source code. Having code in these special files means that we don't get a lot of modern software development developer tools, like linters, language servers, and more. We should make it nice to write a new "built-in function" even if it's not in a `.bif` file.

## Other languages?

We can take this idea from BiFs and create a general problem. BiFs are simply a FFI (foreign function interface) for Zeekscript!

This should be surprisingly easy. We don't need a big ABI. We just need functions to understand one, 16-bit structure: `ZVal`.

Since `ZVal` is C-compatible, we just put it in a C header. Then, we make a foreign function signature like:

```
// The function pointer that will be used for foreign funcs
typedef ZVal (*foreign_func)(void* vm, ZVal* args, int arg_count);
```

Then, the Rust VM holds all of the functions which have registered themselves:

```
// In some Rust struct...
ffi_funcs: HashMap<String, ForeignFuncEntry>, // ForeignFuncEntry contains the pointer, and other useful info
```

Then, we give a C function that can register a function. It just adds to this `ffi_funcs` member:

```
// Adds 'name' to the functions that the VM knows about, so it can call them.
void zeek_register_ffi_func(const char* name, ForeignFunc func);
```

The specifics here could be flaky; it's possible that the Rust VM isn't initialized when this is called. If so, we could just add it to a manifest to process on the VM's initialization. That might be the simplest path.

Note that we probably need to add an argument that declares what types `func` would take and return. This would probably just be a third argument, with a struct that declares what values the BiF takes. It'll probably cap at some value so that it can be statically allocated. The specifics don't matter, but there will be a way to typecheck the BiF's arguments and return type.

Then, any code that wants to include a new FFI function will register their function:

```
Plugin::Configure() {
  zeek_register_ffi_func("MyPlugin::my_fun_ffi_func", &impl_fun_func, /*a signature or something*/);
}
```

Then, `bifcl` just gets an extra job: it creates "shims" that will take in the `ZVal` and creates the correct types for the function, then calls that function. Each BiF registers the *shim* into the Rust VM. BiFs are not special anymore, other than that they have an extra step to create legacy `Val*` instances if they were not provided in the `ZVal`.

## Drawbacks

This may slow Zeek down in the short term. Converting from `ZVal` to `Val*` will be expensive. That's okay. We will convert many high-impact BiFs into the standard library first. Then, we can slowly convert other BiFs. The number of BiFs should not increase after this is introduced, which means users will have an incentive to switch to the new VM.

We also have problems when BiFs modify values passed in. This is a pretty common problem, which would require something like:

1) Create a `Val*` from each `ZVal`
2) Call BiF
3) Copy each `Val*` argument back into the `ZVal` (this can be complex!)

> [!NOTE]
> Mutability is a big, big problem here. We will have to deal with it by often creating *new* `ZVal` instances, then the VM will have to update the frame slot back in the VM! This is really expensive, and we should work hard to convert these over quickly.

ZAM already has a list of BiFs and their "attributes" like if it doesn't contain side effects. We should leverage this. Even still, it may modify global state, which can be a problem: these would have to be specifically accounted for so that the changes get copied into persistent memory in the VM. These are top picks for a rewrite.

There is also a special care we should give to these new FFIs internally. Some BiFs will turn into language intrinsics. Some will turn into Rust standard library operations. Some will stick to C++. We should have clear reasons why, and try to remove as many variables in the creation process as possible. Though, it may have to be fragmented. In fact, developer experience might be hurt by this, since it could go through multiple languages and FFIs at a time.

# Proposal

So the concrete proposal here is that we create a generic FFI mechanism, where you may register FFI functions with the VM. Then, BiFs are just a special (slow) case of a C++ FFI.

A top priority, then, would be to translate BiFs into the new mechanism, in order to avoid copying.
