# Problem 4: Logs

Logs are, of course, a primary concern for Zeek. So far, we have treated the bytecode VM as a *consumer* of what Zeek's core does. Logs, however, are a *producer*. This means it is very necessary for the bytecode to call back into Zeek in order to write logs.

I see two valid approaches, but I'm not sure which is best, or which would cause the smallest amount of surprising behavior within Zeek currently.

## Approach 1: Zeek explicitly requests logs

The first approach is likely the simplest architecturally. As the Rust VM runs, it builds up a vector of logs to write.

This means that the behavior would change to be more similar to logging with `Log::delay`. Of course, a "synchronous" write may copy the data at that-point-in-time, so the behavior for a synchronous write will be similar to present day. But, that may also be slow.

Then, after the Zeek C++ core has requested the Rust VM to drain its event queue, it will then grab all pending log writes and shove them off with `zeek::log_mgr->Write(v, r)` (or similar). There is now a log queue that the C++ code will push off for writing.

## Approach 2: Callbacks

There could be a more generic mechanism for this problem: callbacks. The C++ core would be allowed to register a callback in the Rust VM. The callback might look like:

```
type LogCallback = extern "C" fn(id: u32, columns_arg: ZVal);
```

The `ZVal` itself is lightweight, but to get the columns, it will mean calls past the FFI boundary for each. We can provide helpers to batch this, or make this callback take in a more efficient value, since we *know* what the logger wants here. One example could be that we pass in a struct like:

```
pub struct ZLogColumns {
  stream_id: u32,
  columns: *const ZVal,
  pub num_columns: usize,
}
```

But the specifics for that will come later.

This mechanism lets us have a standard way to have the Rust VM *produce* for the C++ backend in Zeek! It's just registering a logger callback, then attaching that to a certain function or to an opcode.

## Proposal

Because the second proposal keeps log write behavior closer to current behavior, I favor that one. It also provides a more generic mechanism for deferring some logic to C++, but that behavior has to be explicit on VM instantiation, which keeps the separation of concerns.
